XI. The Nine Situations 

孙子曰：用兵之法，有散地，有轻地，有争地，有交地，有衢地，有重地，有泛地，有围地，有死地。   
Sun Tzu said: The art of war recognizes nine varieties of ground: (1) Dispersive ground; (2) facile[易做到的] ground; (3) contentious ground; (4) open ground; (5) ground of intersecting highways; (6) serious ground; (7) difficult ground; (8) hemmed-in ground; (9) desperate ground. 

诸侯自战其地者，为散地；   
When a chieftain is fighting in his own territory, it is dispersive ground. 

入人之地不深者，为轻地；   
When he has penetrated[渗透] into hostile territory, but to no great distance, it is facile ground. 

我得亦利，彼得亦利者，为争地；   
Ground the possession of which imports great advantage to either side, is contentious ground. 

我可以往，彼可以来者，为交地；   
Ground on which each side has liberty of movement is open ground. 

诸侯之地三属，先至而得天下众者，为衢地；   
Ground which forms the key to three contiguous[连续的] states, so that he who occupies it first has most of the Empire at his command, is a ground of intersecting highways. 

入人之地深，背城邑多者，为重地；   
When an army has penetrated into the heart of a hostile country, leaving a number of fortified[筑防御工事] cities in its rear[后方], it is serious ground. 

山林、险阻、沮泽，凡难行之道者，为泛地；   
Mountain forests, rugged steeps[峭壁], marshes and fens--all country that is hard to traverse: this is difficult ground. 

所由入者隘，所从归者迂，彼寡可以击吾之众者，为围地；   
Ground which is reached through narrow gorges[峡谷], and from which we can only retire by tortuous paths, so that a small number of the enemy would suffice to crush a large body of our men: this is hemmed in ground. 

疾战则存，不疾战则亡者，为死地。   
Ground on which we can only be saved from destruction by fighting without delay, is desperate ground. 

是故散地则无战，轻地则无止，争地则无攻，   
On dispersive ground, therefore, fight not. On facile ground, halt not. On contentious ground, attack not. 

交地则无绝，衢地则合交，   
On open ground, do not try to block the enemy's way. On the ground of intersecting highways, join hands with your allies. 

重地则掠，泛地则行，   
On serious ground, gather in plunder. In difficult ground, keep steadily on the march. 

围地则谋，死地则战。   
On hemmed-in ground, resort to stratagem. On desperate ground, fight. 

古之善用兵者，能使敌人前后不相及，众寡不相恃，贵贱不相救，上下不相收，   
Those who were called skillful leaders of old knew how to drive a wedge[楔子] between the enemy's front and rear; to prevent co-operation between his large and small divisions; to hinder[阻碍] the good troops from rescuing the bad, the officers from rallying[团结] their men. 

卒离而不集，兵合而不齐。   
When the enemy's men were united, they managed to keep them in disorder. 

合于利而动，不合于利而止。   
When it was to their advantage, they made a forward move; when otherwise, they stopped still. 

敢问敌众而整将来，待之若何曰：先夺其所爱则听矣。   
If asked how to cope with a great host of the enemy in orderly array and on the point of marching to the attack, I should say: "Begin by seizing something which your opponent holds dear; then he will be amenable[有责任的] to your will." 

兵之情主速，乘人之不及。由不虞之道，攻其所不戒也。   
Rapidity is the essence of war: take advantage of the enemy's  unreadiness, make your way by unexpected routes, and attack unguarded spots. 

凡为客之道，深入则专。主人不克，   
The following are the principles to be observed by an invading force: The further you penetrate into a country, the greater will be the solidarity of your troops, and thus the defenders will not prevail against you. 

掠于饶野，三军足食。   
Make forays[侵略] in fertile country in order to supply your army with food. 

谨养而勿劳，并气积力，运兵计谋，为不可测。   
Carefully study the well-being of your men, and do not overtax them. Concentrate your energy and hoard your strength. Keep your army continually on the move, and devise[设计] unfathomable plans. 

投之无所往，死且不北。死焉不得，士人尽力。   
Throw your soldiers into positions whence there is no escape, and they will prefer death to flight. If they will face death, there is nothing they  may not achieve. Officers and men alike will put forth their uttermost strength. 

兵士甚陷则不惧，无所往则固，深入则拘，不得已则斗。   
Soldiers when in desperate straits[困境] lose the sense of fear. If there is no place of refuge, they will stand firm. If they are in hostile country, they will show a stubborn front. If there is no help for it, they will fight hard. 

是故其兵不修而戒，不求而得，不约而亲，不令而信，   
Thus, without waiting to be marshaled[编列], the soldiers will be constantly on the quivive; without waiting to be asked, they will do  your will; without restrictions, they will be faithful; without giving  orders, they can be trusted. 

禁祥去疑，至死无所之。   
Prohibit the taking of omens[预兆], and do away with superstitious doubts. Then, until death itself comes, no calamity[灾难] need be feared. 

吾士无余财，非恶货也；无余命，非恶寿也。   
If our soldiers are not overburdened with money, it is not because they have a distaste for riches; if their lives are not unduly[过度地] long, it is not because they are disinclined to longevity[长寿]. 

令发之日，士卒坐者涕沾襟，偃卧者涕交颐，投之无所往，诸、刿之勇也。   
On the day they are ordered out to battle, your soldiers may weep, those sitting up bedewing their garments, and those lying down letting the tears run down their cheeks. But let them once be brought to bay, and they will display the courage of a Chu or a Kuei. 

故善用兵者，譬如率然。率然者，常山之蛇也。击其首则尾至，击其尾则首至，击其中则首尾俱至。   
The skillful tactician may be likened to the shuai-jan. Now the shuai-jan is a snake that is found in the ChUng mountains. Strike at its head, and you will be attacked by its tail; strike at its tail, and you will be attacked by its head; strike at its middle, and you will be attacked by head and tail both. 

敢问兵可使如率然乎？曰可。夫吴人与越人相恶也，当其同舟而济而遇风，其相救也如左右手。  
Asked if an army can be made to imitate the shuai-jan, I should answer, Yes. For the men of Wu and the men of Yueh are enemies; yet if they are crossing a river in the same boat and are caught by a storm, they will come to each other's assistance just as the left hand helps the right. 

是故方马埋轮，未足恃也；   
Hence it is not enough to put one's trust in the tethering[拴住] of horses, and the burying of chariot wheels in the ground 

齐勇如一，政之道也；   
The principle on which to manage an army is to set up one standard of courage which all must reach. 

刚柔皆得，地之理也。   
How to make the best of both strong and weak--that is a question involving the proper use of ground. 

故善用兵者，携手若使一人，不得已也。   
Thus the skillful general conducts his army just as though he were leading a single man, willy[阳物]-nilly, by the hand. 

军之事，静以幽，正以治，   
It is the business of a general to be quiet and thus ensure secrecy; upright and just, and thus maintain order. 

能愚士卒之耳目，使之无知；   
He must be able to mystify his officers and men by false reports and appearances, and thus keep them in total ignorance. 

易其事，革其谋，使人无识；易其居，迂其途，使民不得虑。   
By altering his arrangements and changing his plans, he keeps the enemy without definite[确切的] knowledge. By shifting his camp and taking circuitous routes, he prevents the enemy from anticipating[抢先] his purpose. 

帅与之期，如登高而去其梯；帅与之深入诸侯之地，而发其机。   
At the critical moment, the leader of an army acts like one who has climbed up a height and then kicks away the ladder behind him. He carries his men deep into hostile territory before he shows his hand. 

若驱群羊，驱而往，驱而来，莫知所之。   
He burns his boats and breaks his cooking-pots; like a shepherd[牧羊人] driving a flock of sheep, he drives his men this way and that, and nothing knows whither he is going. 

聚三军之众，投之于险，此谓将军之事也。   
To muster his host and bring it into danger:--this may be termed the business of the general. 

九地之变，屈伸之力，人情之理，不可不察也。   
The different measures suited to the nine varieties of ground; the expediency[权宜] of aggressive[侵略性的] or defensive tactics; and the fundamental laws of human nature: these are things that must most certainly be studied. 

凡为客之道，深则专，浅则散。   
When invading hostile territory, the general principle is, that penetrating deeply brings cohesion[凝聚]; penetrating but a short way means dispersion. 

去国越境而师者，绝地也；四彻者，衢地也；   
When you leave your own country behind, and take your army across neighborhood territory, you find yourself on critical ground. When there are means of communication on all four sides, the ground is one of intersecting highways. 

入深者，重地也；入浅者，轻地也；   
When you penetrate deeply into a country, it is serious ground. When you penetrate but a little way, it is facile ground. 

背固前隘者，围地也；无所往者，死地也。   
When you have the enemy's strongholds[大本营] on your rear[后方], and narrow passes in front, it is hemmed-in ground. When there is no place of refuge at all, it is desperate ground. 

是故散地吾将一其志，轻地吾将使之属，   
Therefore, on dispersive ground, I would inspire my men with unity of purpose. On facile ground, I would see that there is close connection between all parts of my army. 

争地吾将趋其后，   
On contentious ground, I would hurry up my rear. 

交地吾将谨其守，交地吾将固其结，衢地吾将谨其恃，   
On open ground, I would keep a vigilant eye on my defenses. On ground of intersecting highways, I would consolidate my alliances. 

重地吾将继其食，泛地吾将进其途，   
On serious ground, I would try to ensure a continuous stream of supplies. On difficult ground, I would keep pushing on along the road. 

围地吾将塞其阙，死地吾将示之以不活。   
On hemmed-in ground, I would block any way of retreat. On desperate  ground, I would proclaim to my soldiers the hopelessness of saving their lives. 

故兵之情：围则御，不得已则斗，过则从。   
For it is the soldier's disposition[性情] to offer an obstinate[顽固的] resistance when surrounded, to fight hard when he cannot help himself, and to obey promptly[立刻的] when he has fallen into danger. 

是故不知诸侯之谋者，不能预交；不知山林、险阻、沮泽之形者，不能行军；不用乡导，不能得地利。   
We cannot enter into alliance with neighboring princes until we are acquainted with their designs. We are not fit to lead an army on the march unless we are familiar with the face of the country--its mountains and forests, its pitfalls[陷阱] and precipices[悬崖], its marshes and swamps. We shall be unable to turn natural advantages to account unless we make use of local guides.  

四五者，一不知，非霸王之兵也。   
To be ignored of any one of the following four or five principles does not befit a warlike prince. 

夫霸王之兵，伐大国，则其众不得聚；威加于敌，则其交不得合。  
When a warlike prince attacks a powerful state, his generalship shows itself in preventing the concentration of the enemy's forces. He overawes[威慑] his opponents, and their allies are prevented from joining against him. 
是故不争天下之交，不养天下之权，信己之私，威加于敌，则其城可拔，其国可隳。   
Hence he does not strive to ally himself with all and sundry[各式各样的], nor does he foster the power of other states. He carries out his own secret designs, keeping his antagonists in awe[畏怯]. Thus he is able to capture their cities and overthrow their kingdoms. 

施无法之赏，悬无政之令。犯三军之众，若使一人。   
Bestow rewards without regard to rule, issue orders without regard to previous arrangements; and you will be able to handle a whole army as though you had to do with but a single man. 

犯之以事，勿告以言；犯之以害，勿告以利。   
Confront your soldiers with the deed[行动] itself; never let them know your design. When the outlook is bright, bring it before their eyes; but tell them nothing when the situation is gloomy. 

投之亡地然后存，陷之死地然后生。   
Place your army in deadly peril[危险], and it will survive; plunge it into desperate straits[困难], and it will come off in safety. 

夫众陷于害，然后能为胜败。   
For it is precisely when a force has fallen into harm this way that is capable of striking a blow for victory. 

故为兵之事，在顺详敌之意，   
Success in warfare is gained by carefully accommodating ourselves to the enemy's purpose. 

并敌一向，千里杀将，   
By persistently hanging on the enemy's flank[侧翼], we shall succeed in the long run in killing the commander-in-chief. 

是谓巧能成事。   
This is called ability to accomplish a thing by sheer[绝对的] cunning. 

是故政举之日，夷关折符，无通其使，   
On the day that you take up your command, block the frontier passes, destroy the official tallies[记账], and stop the passage of all emissaries. 

厉于廊庙之上，以诛其事。  
Be stern[严厉的] in the council-chamber, so that you may control the situation. 

敌人开阖，必亟入之，   
If the enemy leaves a door open, you must rush in. 

先其所爱，微与之期，   
Forestall[占先一步] your opponent by seizing what he holds dear, and subtly[巧妙地] contrive[谋划] to time his arrival on the ground. 

践墨随敌，以决战事。   
Walk in the path defined by rule, and accommodate yourself to the enemy until you can fight a decisive battle. 

是故始如处女，敌人开户；后如脱兔，敌不及拒。   
At first, then, exhibit the coyness[羞怯] of a maiden, until the enemy gives you an opening; afterwards emulate the rapidity of a running hare, and it will be too late for the enemy to oppose you. 