XII. The Attack by Fire 

孙子曰：凡火攻有五：一曰火人，二曰火积，三曰火辎，四曰火库，五曰火队。   
Sun Tzu said: There are five ways of attacking with fire. The first is to burn soldiers in their camp; the second is to burn stores; the third is to burn baggage trains; the fourth is to burn arsenals and magazines; the fifth is to hurl[投掷] dropping fire amongst the enemy. 

行火必有因，因必素具。   
In order to carry out an attack, we must have means[手段] available. The material for raising fire should always be kept in readiness. 

发火有时，起火有日。   
There is a proper season for making attacks with fire, and special days for starting a conflagration. 

时者，天之燥也。日者，月在箕、壁、翼、轸也。凡此四宿者，风起之日也。   
The proper season is when the weather is very dry; the special days are  those when the moon is in the constellations[星座] of the Sieve, the Wall, the Wing or the Cross-bar; for these four are all days of rising wind. 

凡火攻，必因五火之变而应之：   
In attacking with fire, one should be prepared to meet five possible developments: 

火发于内，则早应之于外；   
When fire breaks out inside to enemy's camp, respond at once with an attack from without. 

火发而其兵静者，待而勿攻，
If there is an outbreak of fire, but the enemy's soldiers remain quiet, bide[等待] your time and do not attack. 

极其火力，可从而从之，不可从则上。
(3) When the force of the flames has reached its height, follow it up with an attack, if that is practicable; if not, stay where you are. 

火可发于外，无待于内，以时发之，  
(4) If it is possible to make an assault with fire from without, do not wait for it to break out within, but deliver your attack at a favorable moment. 

火发上风，无攻下风， 
(5) When you start a fire, be to windward of it. Do not attack from the leeward. 

昼风久，夜风止。  
A wind that rises in the daytime lasts long,but a night breeze soon falls. 

凡军必知五火之变，以数守之。   
In every army, the five developments connected with fire must be known, the movements of the stars calculated, and a watch kept for the proper days. 

故以火佐攻者明，以水佐攻者强。   
Hence those who use fire as an aid to the attack show intelligence; those who use water as an aid to the attack gain an accession[增加] of strength. 

水可以绝，不可以夺。   
By means of water, an enemy may be intercepted[拦截], but not robbed of all his belongings. 

夫战胜攻取而不惰其功者凶，命曰“费留” 。   

Unhappy is the fate of one who tries to win his battles and succeed in his attacks without cultivating[培养] the spirit of enterprise[进取心]; for the result is waste of time and general stagnation[停滞]. 

故曰：明主虑之，良将惰之，   
Hence the saying: The enlightened ruler lays his plans well ahead; the good general cultivates his resources. 

非利不动，非得不用，非危不战。   
Move not unless you see an advantage; use not your troops unless there is something to be gained; fight not unless the position is critical. 

主不可以怒而兴师，将不可以愠而攻战。   
No ruler should put troops into the field merely to gratify his own  spleen[坏脾气]; no general should fight a battle simply out of pique. 

合于利而动，不合于利而上。   
If it is to your advantage, make a forward move; if not, stay where you are. 

怒可以复喜，愠可以复说，

Anger may in time change to gladness; vexation may be succeeded by content. 

亡国不可以复存，死者不可以复生。   
But a kingdom that has once been destroyed can never come again into  being; nor can the dead ever be brought back to life. 

故明主慎之，良将警之。此安国全军之道也。   
Hence the enlightened ruler is heedful, and the good general full of caution. This is the way to keep a country at peace and an army intact. 