V. Energy 

孙子曰：凡治众如治寡，分数是也；   
Sun Tzu said: The control of a large force is the same principle as the control of a few men: it is merely a question of dividing up their numbers. 

斗众如斗寡，形名是也；   
Fighting with a large army under your command is nowise different   from fighting with a small one: it is merely a question of instituting signs and signals.

三军之众，可使必受敌而无败者，奇正是也；   
To ensure that your whole host may withstand the brunt of the enemy's attack and remain unshaken--this is effected by maneuvers direct and indirect. 

兵之所加，如以□①投卵者，虚实是也。   
That the impact of your army may be like a grindstone dashed against an egg--this is effected by the science of weak points and strong. 

凡战者，以正合，以奇胜。   
In all fighting, the direct method may be used for joining battle, but indirect methods will be needed in order to secure victory. 

故善出奇者，无穷如天地，不竭如江海。终而复始，日月是也。死而更生，四时是也。   
Indirect tactics, efficiently applied, are inexhaustible as Heaven and Earth, unending as the flow of rivers and streams; like the sun and moon, they end but to begin anew; like the four seasons, they pass away to return once more. 

声不过五，五声之变，不可胜听也；   
There are not more than five musical notes, yet the combinations of these five give rise to more melodies than can ever be heard. 

色不过五，五色之变，不可胜观也；   
There are not more than five primary colors (blue, yellow, red, white,   and black), yet in combination they produce more hues than can ever been seen. 

味不过五，五味之变，不可胜尝也；   
There are not more than five cardinal tastes (sour, acrid, salt, sweet, bitter), yet combinations of them yield more flavors than can ever be tasted. 

战势不过奇正，奇正之变，不可胜穷也。   
In battle, there are not more than two methods of attack--the direct and  the indirect; yet these two in combination give rise to an endless series of maneuvers. 

奇正相生，如循环之无端，孰能穷之哉！   
The direct and the indirect lead on to each other in turn. It is like moving in a circle--you never come to an end. Who can exhaust the possibilities of their combination?

激水之疾，至于漂石者，势也；   
The onset[进攻] of troops is like the rush of a torrent which will even roll stones along in its course. 

鸷鸟之疾，至于毁折者，节也。   
The quality of decision is like the well-timed swoop[俯冲] of a falcon[猎鹰] which enables it to strike and destroy its victim. 

故善战者，其势险，其节短。   
Therefore the good fighter will be terrible in his onset, and prompt in his decision. 

势如扩弩，节如发机。  
Energy may be likened to the bending of a crossbow; decision, to the releasing of a trigger. 

纷纷纭纭，斗乱而不可乱；浑浑沌沌，形圆而不可败。   
Amid the turmoil and tumult of battle, there may be seeming disorder and yet no real disorder at all; amid confusion and chaos, your array may be without head or tail, yet it will be proof against defeat. 

乱生于治，怯生于勇，弱生于强。   
Simulated disorder postulates perfect discipline, simulated fear postulates courage; simulated weakness postulates strength. 

治乱，数也；勇怯，势也；强弱，形也。   
Hiding order beneath the cloak of disorder is simply a question of subdivision; concealing courage under a show of timidity presupposes   a fund of latent[潜在] energy; masking strength with weakness is to be  effected by tactical dispositions. 

故善动敌者，形之，敌必从之；予之，敌必取之。   
Thus one who is skillful at keeping the enemy on the move maintains   deceitful appearances, according to which the enemy will act. He sacrifices something, that the enemy may snatch at it. 

以利动之，以卒待之。   
By holding out baits, he keeps him on the march; then with a body of picked men he lies in wait for him. 

故善战者，求之于势，不责于人故能择人而任势。   
The clever combatant looks to the effect of combined energy, and does not require too much from individuals. Hence his ability to pick out the right men and utilize combined energy. 

任势者，其战人也，如转木石。木石之性，安则静，危则动，方则止，圆则行。   
When he utilizes combined energy, his fighting men become as it were like to rolling logs or stones. For it is the nature of a log or stone to  remain motionless on level ground, and to move when on a slope; if four-cornered, to come to a standstill, but if round-shaped, to go rolling down. 

故善战人之势，如转圆石于千仞之山者，势也。   
Thus the energy developed by good fighting men is as the momentum of a round stone rolled down a mountain thousands of feet in height. So much on the subject of energy. 
 【注：】①：“瑕” 的“王”旁换“石”旁。  